we have a vast subject here the national
security state we have three
distinguished speakers who will each
speak for 15 minutes no longer that's
the idea so that we can have an hour and
a quarter for questions and answers the
first speaker is Professor fog is a
distinguished jurist I think is familiar
to everybody and who needs no
introduction and is himself going to
introduce the origins of the national
security state thank you let me first
say that I'm very delighted to be part
of what I think is a very important
conference taking place at a critical
time when the paucity of radical
thinking has been very obviously costly
to the quality of political democracy in
this country I want to emphasize two
different explanations of how the
national security state came about and
try to evaluate them both I think they
both have something significant to teach
us briefly the first one is that the
national security state was basically a
response to a series of structural
developments in international society
associated with the kinds of military
technology that emerged at during the
course of World War two that it
reflected the place of war in
international relations and therefore
was when you combine the kind of
technology that was available with the
centrality of war the sort of national
security apparatus that
merged was virtually inevitable in this
in turn combined with the tendency of
major states leading states to always
take full advantage of whatever
opportunities existed for economic and
geopolitical expansion in other words
that one didn't really need
anti-communism as a foundation for the
kind of build up of the national
security state that occurred because
there were these structural developments
that took place in the period after
World War Two and that at most
anti-communism was an ideological
convenience that helped explain in a
coherent way what was happening but it
would have happened somehow or other
independently in any event the second
line of explanation is I suppose evident
from the way I've been talking that
anti-communism was more than an
ideological convenience that it was an
indispensable and integral element in
creating the national security state
because it was the only way in which a
domestic consensus could be mobilized
and sustained and it was the only way to
overcome very fundamental u.s.
traditions about demobilization in peer
in postwar periods and especially about
staying out of European politics one has
to understand that the post-war u.s.
foreign policy represented an
extraordinary rupture with the
traditions of u.s. foreign policy
going back to George Washington's
farewell address the keystone of which
was let Europe fight its own Wars if we
have to participate we'll enter them
after they start in World War one and
World War two both proceeded from those
premises where both presidents Woodrow
Wilson and Franklin Roosevelt had to do
manipulate domestic public opinion in
order to create an intervention Airi
base of political support the
isolationist tradition with respect to
Europe not with respect to Western
Hemisphere or the Pacific isolationism
only meant staying out of Europe and
that was a very strong heartland
tradition that had to be overcome in the
post 1945 climate of opinion so it seems
to me these two views where the sent are
are central to our understanding of how
this national security state found the
basis for support in the political
culture and in the dominant thinking
that emerged after World War Two now let
me try to talk a little bit more in a
little bit more detailed way within the
time restraints about these two
explanations the structural explanation
rests heavily it seems to me on the
actual mindset or outlook of u.s.
post-war leaders what did they believe
what did they think and one of the
things I think that was characteristic
of the most influential of these leaders
were that they were very what is now
called Atlanta cyst
they were very connected they believed
that it was very important to protect
something that was called the Atlantic
political community that was larger than
just the United States
and they were also very influenced by
the failure of interwar diplomacy of the
diplomacy of the 1930s especially
appeasement and the lesson of Munich was
the most powerful image for this
post-war leadership they were also very
influenced by the failure of wilsonian
idealism they did not trust law or
morality or international institutions
as the basis for maintaining
international security they were
skeptical of the United Nations they
were skeptical of any kind of serious
reliance on international law Canon
George Kennan and Dean Acheson
were the archetypal thinkers with this
kind of point of view they believed that
the way to create peace the only way was
to have superior countervailing military
power and that therefore that the
preparation for war paradoxically was
the basis for peace and the only basis
and that becoming disarming or
demobilizing were actually war provoking
postures the second important element
here was the character of the the
changed character of the global
geopolitical setting especially the
weakening of Europe as a organizing
force in the world the collapse of the
colonial powers established what was
regarded at the time as a vacuum it's a
kind of racist sense that unless the
color unless the first world is
controlling what happens in the
non-western world there's nothing
happening and some other first world
force will enter therefore if the
European power
could no longer fill the vacuum of the
non-western world then it had to be the
United States and that was what was
called in the code language of
international diplomacy in the post-war
period the global responsibility of the
United States the third important factor
was the changing context of war due to
technological innovations the United
States no longer enjoyed geographical or
temporal margins of safety the United
States lost its sense of invulnerability
this was the wider lesson of Pearl
Harbor compounded or intensified by the
experience of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to
be secured meant to be ready always to
fight the greatest war in history if you
weren't ready in a matter of minutes you
could be decisively defeated Pearl
Harbor was a small prefiguring of what a
surprise attack directed against an
unmoving these other elements that it
was obsolete for the United States to
believe that it could protect its
interests and avoid World War 3
without remaining involved in Europe
this is very important in understanding
the build-up of the national security
state and the role that anti-communism
played in that build-up it was no longer
possible to react to a general war there
wasn't time
it was net and it would be too
devastating to react it was necessary to
prevent World War 3 and the Europeans
couldn't be trusted to
vented on their own they had stumbled
into two world wars Germany had to be
kept weak and one had to find an
acceptable way to keep Germany weak and
the only way to do that was to keep it
divided and there had to be a legitimate
foundation for that division again
anti-communism anti-soviet ism was very
important the fifth and final important
element here was the sense that
capitalism as a as a political economic
form depended if not on war at least on
a continued high level of military
spending
what has sometimes been called military
Keynesianism was seen as indispensable
for the to avoid the recurrence of the
Great Depression and the leaders and the
thinking in this post-war period was not
only preoccupied with Munich the lessons
of Munich and Pearl Harbor but also the
fear that capitalism couldn't find a
peacetime strategy for successfully
protecting the world economy now in
these settings all of these factors in a
sense are quite independent of the
existence of the Soviet Union and of the
challenge of communism but what one has
to notice is that there were was another
way of thinking about the post-war
period and that bate was based on a
continuation of wartime collaboration
Franklin Roosevelt had the vision of the
four horsemen so-called who would
maintain the peace of the world after
fascism was defeated it was not a view
based on the United Nations it was a
balance of power view but the Soviet
Union the United States would be
partners not
antagonists in that vision one also
finds that in the very earliest
documents 4546
documents secret documents within the
government there was a disagreement
between this Pentagon the Defense
Department as it was then called and the
State Department as to how much reliance
should be placed on the United Nations
how much reliance on cooperation with
the Soviet Union there was not at that
immediate post-war period a consensus
that the Soviet Union was the rival and
the defining element in u.s. security
policy and that's where anti-communism
came in because it built the consensus
that overcame isolationism overcame the
sense that maybe the United Nations
should be given a chance that maybe one
could continue the post-war
collaboration and this this reliance on
anti-communism as a coherent ideology
had the dual effects of validating a
permanent reliance on militarism as the
basis for dealing with the external
world and particularly create created
the foundation for staying involved in
Europe that Europe became occupied as a
continent in a way that isolationism
would never have permitted without being
trumped in effect by anti-communism and
the and no one expected American
military forces to be in Europe more
than a couple of years after the
fighting stopped and it was only through
this ideological buildup that the that
it became politically viable to remain
in Europe
to have this real rupture the the
external dimension of the ideological
reinforcement of this structural
position was as I said a permanent
militarism the internal dimension was
the justification for the forms of
anti-democratic practice that became
associated with the internal security
aspects that the enemy was within as
well as without the Rosenberg trial was
in as important as the interpretation of
the Stalinist extension of Soviet power
to Eastern Europe that both of these
developments created a consensus about
the way in which the United States
should pursue its security that has
persisted till this very moment and all
the authoritative documents suggest the
degree to which this consensus has been
reinforced by the media as establishing
a boundary on what political parties
could disagree about and on what they
could seriously discuss see what this is
what has the role of anti-communism in
that sense has been to place structural
and
intellectual limits on the boundaries of
legitimate discussion and political
competition with the bureaucracy and the
media mutually reinforcing each other in
assuring the maintenance of this
stability so that the cones that led to
the formation of the national security
state are never drawn into question and
the recent campaign is one last one
recent confirmation of that the debate
on the the congressional debate on what
to do about the Sandinistas and Contras
is another illustration of this where
the Democratic Party opposition always
had to say justify its position by
saying the Contras couldn't succeed that
they wouldn't win it was not possible to
say that the Sandinistas represent the
legitimate outcome of a struggle for
self-determination and besides they're
the best government Nicaragua has ever
had
as as far as I know no major political
figure or major media source has been
willing to associate itself with that
view and that's the last sort of the
enduring colonizing impact of this Cold
War ideology which even if we become
friendly with the Soviet Union will
still have us in its thraldom because
it's can it's displaced onto an
opposition toward any kind of political
radicalism anywhere in the world and so
in conclusion I would say that it's
indispensable to operate in a political
climate that fundamentally repudiates
these boundaries both structural and
ideological on choice political
discussion and that as far as I can tell
the formal institutions of the of the
government at this point don't allow
that nor do the two political parties so
what is called for is some kind of new
radicalism that repudiates
the possibilities of success within
mainstream competition at this time
thank you
Thank You professor for for that
brilliantly clear overview I'm sure you
have plenty more to say later on when
when we go into the discussion now I
want to introduce my old friend Daniel
Ellsberg who is with became well known
around the revelation of the Pentagon
Papers and has been working hard for
peace ever since and Daniel Ellsberg is
is going to speak on also in the Cold
War as an extension of world war ii and
there are obviously some problems with
interpreting the Cold War as an
extension of World War two first of all
can you hear me in back yes
louder okay first of all there would
seem to have been a reversal of
alliances and in fact that is not an
illusion that is something that had to
be accomplished in the eyes of our
leaders yes as of about 44 looking ahead
to it 45 46 and 47 that imposed certain
problems because the perception of our
recent enemy Germany especially under
the leadership that we opposed but the
German people as a whole and of the
Japanese was such that it was not an
easy matter for those who were my age at
the end of the war which was fourteen or
older to contemplate and the steps that
were necessary to do that that shift of
alliances in effect a rearming of
Germany a reestablishment of Germany is
preeminent economically in Europe and in
a defector alliance with the Japanese
okay was one problem that that's a cause
for certain ideological offensive that
is still very much shaping our thinking
but I want to mention one or two other
things building on what dick Fogg has
already said I'm going over in a way the
same period but I hope not to repeat
that points he made all of which I very
much endorse I'd like to point to a
change that happened during World War
two in the ethic of our leaders partly
transmitted to our public which was
secret at the time and which is with us
still and its functional role in the
post-war era that was an ethic which was
accepted although it was much earlier
proposed by the air force in both
England and America but was accepted by
the civilian leaders fighting against a
total enemy
devil like demonic enemies of enormous
power and threat and evil against whom
had seemed to be justified to use any
means I'm going to suggest that the
United States adopted a notion of war
all wars as essentially total wars in
the sense that was first advocated in
Germany around 1920 adopted by Hitler
are very openly a sense that ones
methods in war were limited only by
physical capabilities and by the
necessities of the situation that one
prosecuted any war against anyone by any
means necessary meaning with no
restraint of law morality democracy
public consent or anything of that sort
very specifically that the couple
thousand year old or a thousand year old
ethic of just war in wartime use in
Bello the absolute condemnation of
deliberate attacks on civilians or
non-combatants the pillar of the law of
war in war the pillar of what had become
international law of war in war was to
be overthrown was to be rejected this
was never and to this day has never been
publicly announced by our leaders but on
asserting that why I could date it in
1942 when the British decided the
British Cabinet decided with the
acceptance of the Americans to take
civilian housing as the direct bombing
targets call in the Air Force the D G
sees the designated ground zeroes of
those days the target areas of our
bombing were not to be factories not to
be ports or installations let alone
bases but the housing of civilians in
which civilians were living the house
the Germans German this was an adoption
of what the British called terror
bombing and when the United States
looked at that at that point in the
belief that our bombing was capable of
being much more precise than the fault
believe they the air force though it
accepted it was really quite condemning
of that as being basically immoral
although we accepted it in a wartime era
lie because of the necessities of the
war and it was all they could do because
they could only bomb at night and so
forth I won't go through all this we
however our Air Force did come to accept
that even in Germany as we participated
in the bombing on Dresden in the same
month bombed Berlin with the killing of
25,000 people in a single night in
Berlin civilians this six months before
the bombing of Hiroshima in the same
month again we were killing more people
in Tokyo in one night then died
immediately from both atom bombs six
months later so the ethic of taking
civilians or non-combatants is the
direct target of our major military
operations was something adopted by
Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill
and others well before the atom bomb
came along to put it more immediately in
our capabilities as happened six months
later with the atom bomb the end of the
war found us with as I say a need for
new alliances in a kind of broad global
scale and new responsibilities not only
on the one hand the re-establishing of a
direct relationship as soon as possible
with the despised Germans and the
racially despised as well as enemy
Japanese but also a whole structure of
alliances the Cold War can be seen not
only as a competition but it's a
structure of alliances throughout the
world and not only with industrial
states but specifically with indigenous
elites or ruling groups landlords of
generally oligarchies military powers in
former colonies or other third world
countries all over the world many of
which by any standards then are now
among the most murderous genocidal
corrupt vicious regimes ever to be seen
anywhere
our current mli for example in health
I would say with the facade of Duarte
fits of that category that I just
described and may get shortly very worse
with arena taken in a short run with the
reign of taking power within the new
elections it also has a familiar ring to
me I'm leaping ahead here that I
remember very well in election year
twenty years twenty four years ago which
I was in the government in 64 in which
the incumbent party found that a proxy
war in the third world was failing in
Vietnam challenging us to do something
more than we had yet done and the first
thing that suggested itself in the
government was massive bombing or as I
come back to my point a utilization of
this weapon of terrorism terrorism and
precise technical sense of the
deliberate violence against state well
no deliberate violence organized
violence against civilians
non-combatants for a political purpose
the bombing was a terror weapon nuclear
weapons both atom and each bombs are in
their nature and escape ibly weapons of
terrorism and I'm saying that that was
essentially adopted by our leaders as an
available instrument as was and I think
not coincidentally the more familiar
types of terrorism torture assassination
massacre by the quote allies that we
were going to install or support in
various parts of the world as it's
happening in El Salvador the terrorism
we should remember by the way in El
Salvador that reached the level of
perhaps 40,000 people in the year 1980
was a year of a democratic
administration that was pre Reagan was
Jimmy Carter who presided over that
death squad democracy and Reagan were to
continue to Bush was who was going to
continue it earlier I'm saying this has
been available for a long time this has
been available for a long time sorry we
can't hear me
the and I've described then several
challenges to a leadership the use of
absolute weapons the use of weapons that
did not admit of ethical use in earlier
terms which needed an absolute enemy to
justify them ho chi minh Fidel Castro
etc on their own really are hard to
justify this kind of approach to it was
necessary to have an enemy that was
powerful and threatening as well as
absolutely evil and absolutely
unrestrained and of course we found this
in the model that we just gone through
of Adolf Hitler so the necessity of
seeing the Soviet Union not only as a
repressive which it certainly was not
only as murderous to its own population
but as a power of absolutely
unrestrained insatiable global ambitions
capable of reckless means willing to use
any means in the pursuit of those
ambitions in the model of Hitler was
essential as I say to these functions we
saw of taking over the worldwide
responsibilities of the former colonial
powers endorsing them and doing this in
the company of former enemy powers this
is where we are ever since fighting an
absolute enemy with the threat always
and I could take a long time on this
which I don't have to say how often in
fact we have used the absolute weapon of
h-bombs
in the form of threats use them in the
way that a gun is used when you pointed
at someone's head whether or not you
pull the trigger we have used nuclear
weapons secretly in that way at least a
dozen times and I'm suggesting now that
that is closely related to the ability
to see our opponent all over the world
wherever in Central America and Iran
wherever as an arm of this absolute
Hitler like enemy but one last aspect of
that identification needs to be
mentioned and that is an enemy with whom
one cannot compromise because of its
insatiability contempt for law
trickiness and so forth no collaboration
is possible no compromise is possible
and essential pillar
of the Cold War formula perception and
one which yet I put it to you at this
point no relation to the reality of
potential dealings with the Soviet Union
under any of the leadership suis seen
for some reality did Hitler mentioned
Munich one way to understand Munich
would have been could have been that it
was a mistake to see the Soviet Union as
a country one could not collaborate with
at the time of Munich and to see Hitler
as one one could compromise with in
other words to see the Soviet Union in
effect as a greater evil Hitler as a
lesser evil that was the mistake that
would be one way to read the lesson in
unity of course it's not the way we read
it the totalitarian notion which equates
Hitler with the Soviet Union in
retrospect confirms our unwillingness to
ally with the Soviet Union in 1937 or 38
and says the only mistake was we thought
we could lie with anyone like the Soviet
Union such as Hitler these are
totalitarian countries one cannot
collaborate with put our wartime
experience beside again we learned this
different lesson but it was necessary to
quickly forget it that that grand
alliance just never happened which is
what most Americans now think if you're
aware of current polls we were not alive
we could not have been alive and so for
then we certainly cannot in the future
we now face a situation in which thanks
to the build-up of both sides by both
sides Soviet Union and the United States
of the capability to end life on Earth
each can do that individually the French
and the English will shortly modernize
their forces to a degree which will make
it possible for them individually to
create a nuclear winter so we'll have
four super super powers in that new
sense and others coming this is a world
in which essentially no problem we face
not the nuclear one but not the
ecological one not the economic one can
possibly be based congresso we be
handled even addressed on the unilateral
national basis on which each of our
candidates in the recent election is
purporting to address it
a total in fealty to this image of the
necessity and possibility of unilateral
action without collaboration with
enemies or in powerful friends each of
them is turning away from this
fundamental reality a dismay might I've
reached my time here a dismaying
situation even though I've reached my
time I ask for sixty Seconds to point to
one image of hope here it will take a
miracle it would seem for the politics
of this country as it's exhibited in
this election to be transcended an
election in which the truly liberal to
some degree governor of Massachusetts
found it necessary to pledge his
allegiance to the Trident to missile a
stealth bomber to the arms race in
general to what the flag has always
stood for the preeminence of militarism
the points and I'm spilled up and so
forth and that's where we are that's the
choice we had it will take a miracle to
transcend that there happens to be one
world leader at this moment only one
he's not in France he's not in Italy
certainly not in this country
and he's in a country where he would not
have looked for it five years ago
Gorbachev who was talking sense on this
subject simply talking since the new way
of thinking about the necessity for
collaboration for the kind of grand
alliance that we had in fact during
World War two not during Munich and the
joint addressing of these problems
problems not only new thinking but
working together sure it took a kind of
miracle for that to happen in the Soviet
Union we hardly understand it the
process by which presidents are chosen
and actually elected in this country is
somewhat mysterious to me and I suppose
to you still as much as to the Soviet
Union but the opportunities to us to
constrain our presidents once they get
into power are not so mysterious we
ended the Vietnam War against the wishes
of any executive by putting pressure on
our Congress using that constitutional
procedure frail and unlikely as it was
but eventually successfully to take away
the money for waging that
or that war of aggression we the
Democratic platform has in it I'm
talking about short run about measures
that can be taken before the next war
and before the next ten years of the
arms race that's what I happen to be
focusing on and I'll just mention the
Democratic platform thanks to the
existence of the peace move in this
country hiding at the provision for an
immediate comprehensive test bands led
by a moratorium on testing and a
moratorium on the testing of ballistic
missiles the flight testing of ballistic
missiles how many people here in this
selected audience know that's in the
Democratic platform of the last campaign
look around maybe two percent we need to
know better than that what I'm saying is
we just elected to Congress on the
Democratic Congress on that platform
that platform if it led to a moratorium
on flight testing which the Soviets
would probably join could stop the d5
despite not only dukakis's pledge but of
course Bush's unrestricted pledge for
that d5 Trident to missile the absolute
first strike weapon the best one that's
ever been invented I'm saying that not
to hold out any undue ridiculous hopes
are here I'm talking about a miracle but
a miracle it's up to us to participate
in it's up to us to tell a congress the
wheel that they will not be reelected if
they go back on that promise
[Applause]
thank you very much Daniel Ellsberg a
third speaker is a WCM professor of
political science consultant writer
online alignment specialist on that
alignment and consultant to the United
Nations and government of Zimbabwe and
an activist and is going to speak to us
from the consumer point of view of the
national security state madam chair I
really wanted to participate in this
seminar a very personal reason for many
centuries and many years those of us
neo-colonial intellectuals when in the
periphery of the intellectual life have
been very anxious to come to Mecca and
we have come to Mecca to walk with the
streets of the architects of the
national security stream and so in this
mecca I come in this pilgrimage really
to pay homage to the intellectual Giants
who pass through these halls who have
brought such democracy and such solace
to the peoples of the world that are
unfortunately the grand architect critic
my friend which had fought whom we asked
to go first
proceeded to betray his class his
university and denounce these architects
and here again we found following him is
a disrupter of the very important state
that we had created so I want to
disassociate myself
entirely from this kind of activity
because I come from Brooklyn and I come
from Brooklyn College whose motto is
incidentally to me the Harvard of
Flatbush can you imagine a greater
obscenity well now we are not only going
to have security managers who are nice
wasps individuals but we now going to
have brown skin yellow skin black skin
security managers to enter the halls of
the national security state so with that
madam chair I come to discuss what I
want to call very specifically the
internationalization of the national
security state what we are witnessing
today is a global transformation and
this global transformation took the home
immediately after Cold War boo boo a
world war 2 in changing the various
sectors of the world that we now crudely
call the third world into a series of
war zones so that the export of the
national security state in some ways
began with the Korean War when the first
giant experiment was undertaken where
traditional indigenous conflicts could
be utilized and transformed into
becoming a global conflict but primarily
the ideological weapon for the
transformation of these regional
conflicts into global conflicts was the
effective use of the doctrine of
anti-communism so that the fundamental
philosophical tenant of the expo
ah the national security model was the
doctrine of the capitalist encirclement
of the socialist world this encirclement
was to take three forms one of course
the obvious was the military for the
second and equally important was the
economic form and thirdly the cultural
form so that when we talk about the
national security state we should not
think of it primarily as an instrument
of nuclear weapons and nucleus of
nuclear weapons but indeed the nuclear
doctrine integrated into a war doctrine
as Daniel has clearly pointed out has
formed that what I call as created what
I call the phenomenon of the garrison
state but most importantly to transform
civil States and national States into
garrison societies so that what we now
see happening globally is the garrison
ization of the nation-state and the
creation in the third world of a number
of cordon sanitaire so to speak around
the doctrine of deserving and protecting
the fortress and the fortress now has
expanded to include not just the United
States but Western Europe Japan southern
Africa and possibly from time to time
Israel this creation of what we now call
the new transnational state is an
advance over the concept it is an
extension of the concept of the
transnational cooperation this
transnational state is designed for the
protection of the fortress of capital
and in order to protect the fortress of
capital it is essential to have
a cultural strategy and that cultural
strategy is the expansion and export of
values associated with violence and the
consumption of violence and and the
techniques of violence as a daily way by
which conflict resolution can be
resolved this what I call the
internationalization of the Uzi
essentially becomes a weapon that
becomes now part and parcel of our
school system but most importantly
becomes part and parcel of the garrison
strategy of namely in the influencing
educational values to that of the
garrison now this phenomenon of
transformation of the
internationalization of the garrison
state must be also seen domestically as
having certain immediate consequences in
order to make sure that the national
garrison state remains secure it is
vital to develop an urban pacification
program to contain anti-war movements
and the black movements when they become
politicized so the domestic consequence
often of the national security state is
just not only political repression but a
pacification program and this
pacification program essentially gets
linked with the concept of welfare which
is then employed and used in the
political rhetoric depending on how the
ruling elites wish to utilize that
notion of wealth secondly it becomes
essential for this garrison State or
this phenomenon of the garrison state to
introduce a new theory of legitimation
legitimation does not come from popular
acceptance of the activities of the
state legitimation comes as dan has
pointed out and richard earlier comes
primarily by a call for the defense of
the state thus defense becomes a
patriotic call and once defense is made
a patriotic value then those who even
attempt to water down defends become
objects of attack as being trainees so
that this gradual transformation of a
garrison value ie defense turning it
into a value of legitimation does making
the body politic essentially dependent
on the view that if you oppose the
techniques of violence you indeed become
treasonous
now just creates a major problem for
political activity in any society and
I'm not going to talk about this resist
particular society which we have
considerable experience with but I want
to talk about how the concept of
security now when it's exported kidney
transforms the security doctrine itself
therefore the security of the Caribbean
region becomes not a problem for the
Caribbean but the security of the
Caribbean is an American problem this
transformation and redefinition of the
concept of national security and
integrated into the theory of regional
security then linked with the security
of the fortress has changed and totally
transformed world politics and has made
a total mockery out of the concept of
the nation-state and sovereignty so that
this nation states so to speak this
national security state functions in
some ways as follows
it requires an economic strategy for the
fortresses to be secure to obtain there
is
- it requires a monetary strategy where
the integration of the dominant currency
takes place and is dictated to by the
fortress and thirdly it requires a
series of local jungles to undertake the
task of policing the local populations
thus the phenomenon of transforming
Guatemala into one giant aircraft is not
simply an activity of military concerns
but indeed it is the transformation of
Guatemala into becoming a complete
totally dependent garrison State on ikan
and economic sector on the political
sector and most importantly in the
cultural sector I have no time today to
discuss the cultural sector but I think
we need a very serious analysis of the
culture of the national security state
because the culture of the national
security state is there is closely
linked with the whole techniques of
communication and the export of
communication that herb Schiller and his
friends have no doubt discussed in a
previous panel during this conference in
other words information and culture
become an integral part of the strategy
of the national security state now the
question simply arises today as to
whether this transformation that I
talked about of the globe into regional
control regional areas with a new
definition of security has come to an
end because we suddenly are told that
peace has broken out now this again is a
mark of the obscenity of the national
security state with the amount of
violence vastly increasing we are
talking about the reality of nice and
that is the double thing that a national
security state is quite capable of doing
in which the media plays such an
now a new situation has emerged where
the internationalization of the garrison
state has failed because to a large
extent what was undertaken in Korea
Vietnam in East Asia Middle East
southern Africa Central America was
essentially a phenomenon where regional
countries began to resist not nationally
but to resist regionally to the impact
of this new international security state
that demanded a new concept of loyalty
and sovereignty so that it has been the
resistance in Southeast Asia in Korea in
Afghanistan in southern Africa indeed in
Central America that has brought about a
change indeed conceptual thinking of the
national security managers therefore to
say that peace is nothing in both given
to these people without recognizing that
they have been struggling against the
hegemony of the national security state
and succeeded when they succeeded they
turned to the only institution that they
felt could legitimize it namely the
United Nations so that the United
Nations entered into the scene and is
now a protector of the regional
sovereignty of these individual states
against the fortress but a real bomb if
you wish in it when Brooklyn we would
call it in some more picturesque
language but I can't use it here but
whatever heaps of ham
King in a dramatic fashion with cover
jobs willing to willingness to change
the rules of the game
what kovachev did essentially was not
change only the rules of game of the
game internally in the Soviet Union but
most importantly externally in these
regional boards where there is a new
definition of the concept of sovereignty
where one of the major actors which was
constantly bento constantly being
charged for interfering is now
technically or tactically or if you wish
diplomatically pulling out quote-unquote
thus putting placing a major dilemma for
the national security state to respond
to this new diplomatic you know and
that's where we are at today the
national security state is in crisis it
is in crisis because its political
strategy of internationalizing and
creating a global garrison state and
society has failed to it recognizes that
this failure is causing a massive
economic crisis internally which which
it has to readjust to three it has also
recognized in order to pacify the
domestic populations this strategy will
not work because of the growing interest
in peace thus the national security
state has found that its strategy for
the last since world war two is slowly
coming to an hold under this condition
the question must now be raised what
kind of alternative we have to create to
the garrison state and garrison Society
so up to now we have went far too much
time thinking about the character and
nature of the war system it is now
essential that we pay attention to the
formation and gradual transformation and
creation of the peace system for the
third world this is a monumental
breakthrough because for the first time
now we can begin to deal with the issue
of the hell of under
development and the hell of quality
which is the fundamental issue in
throughout the globe and not get trapped
into regional wars which have decimated
the economies of vast bulk of the third
world thus we are in an exciting era
where there is a gradual shift where we
must force the ship from garrison to
reconstruction and that I believe is
what the agenda has to be in the third
but in the meantime please don't go to
rest the warrior caste that comes out
from these hallowed halls this cost is
very clear about its objectives because
like all castes it knows that once it's
functional utility in the economy comes
to an end then they may have to look for
other jobs so that the warrior caste has
a wasted economic interest in the
garrison system and there who it is
necessary for us to start thinking about
alternative employment forms for the
garrison car so that it can indeed begin
to develop more in creating mechanisms
to deal with what we now call the
informal sector in conclusion madam
chair I just want to show that a clear
example of the total incapacity of the
garrison state to deal with social
problems is revealed so dramatically in
the phenomenon of its total inability to
handle the drug question the informal
economy that was unleashed the drug
question the the drug issue which
essentially is a social problem but it
is also a byproduct on this
international is this international
security state because the International
Security say is revealing once again it
is incapable of dealing with a social
problem quote-unquote which is
economically linked with bunch bulk of
the producing sector and they cannot
even handle the distribution system so
that the informal economy in the cities
is finally revealing that the garrison
the national securities day is not only
bankrupt and important internationally
but it is quickly recognizing that
nationally it is time to change its
orientation
[Applause]
thank you very much professor singer
will be taking questions from two
microphones here well line up for the
questions I just noticed a little news
item sorry okay okay well we're getting
ready for questions I have a news item
here from the in from the New York Times
last month
that there a report to defense secretary
Frank Carlucci by a city group of the
defense Science Board quote an
influential advisory group who's a
members come from industry and academia
which has urged the Pentagon to assert
influence over economic policy this is
news I had to head off quote an
increasing loss of technological
leadership to both allies and
adversaries
and this is the latest in a series of
reviews by the military-industrial
complex conducted this year by things
like the congressional office of
Technology Assessment the Air Force
Association the National Defense
University and so on that are all urging
the Pentagon to exert more influence
over taxes trade laws environmental
regulation and education in order to
protect the military-industrial complex
and the New York Times reporter says
that a widely held of quote a widely
held aversion to political control of
the economy is just one element that
could stand in the way of this new
thinking on the military-industrial
complex New York Times well I read at
the International Herald Tribune of 18
October but it's probably a day later
because the Herald Tribune picks up the
New York Times with about a day's delay
but I thought that faced with
Gorbachev's new thinking that this
pentagon new sinking was gave something
to think about
so anyway now we'll be taking questions
please I appreciated hearing from the
three gentlemen it is very impressive
but Danna Johnstone I'd love to hear
from you I did come to hear from you
and a suggestion would be that perhaps
would be too impromptu to apply
professor singham's thoughts to Europe
well I'm really not prepared but
certainly they're there yes I was
thinking about that as I was listening
to Professor Singham because the
regional there is a regional crisis
developing there is a crisis of
competition between regions and it's
being stated in the way precisely of
economic war between the regions and the
it's very dangerous to see what kind of
a regional division is developing
because there is a great deal of talk
about the European Common Market finally
becoming a common market although wait a
little bit but the there's a huge
campaign that is going on especially in
the financial press The Wall Street
Journal and so on against fortress
Europe you know they're going to cheat
them as usual they're gonna cheat and
practice protectionism so that we can't
take over everything there and they're
going to protect their farmers they're
not going to drive them off all the land
so that we can you know flood the place
where they're so soybeans and hamburgers
you